Now, to follow up on the effective dimensionality analysis here, you will get to explore dimensionality
in a bigger model, some slightly different calculations compared to what I showed in the previous video,
somewhat improved visualizations, and most interestingly, I think different texts.
The model we will use here is one of the Pythia models that was trained and released by the org Eleuther.
They also produce the GPT neo models that we've used several times earlier in this course.
So here is the paper that describes this collection of models.
There are several models that you can access, all of which you can get through hugging face.
And here you see the 2.8 billion parameter model that you will use in this code challenge.
The goal of exercise one is basically just to get the activations from this model.
Import the Pythia 2.8 billion parameter model from hugging face.
Print out the model architecture and have a look through its sizes and naming conventions for the text.
You can use the same little slice of Alice tokens that I used in the previous video, along with the
shuffled versions of those tokens.
We will switch to other texts later in this code challenge.
As always, it's a good idea to sanity check your code, for example, by printing out the number of
hidden layers and the size of the activations from any one of those hidden layers.
Okay, now you can pause the video and switch to code, and now I will switch to code, but only briefly.
Considering that most of this exercise is old news.
Some libraries that we will use here is where I'm importing the Eleuther AI Pythia model 2.8 b.
Of course the B is for billion.
Actually this is the tokenizer.
This is the model itself.
I'm putting this on the GPU.
Uh, and then I'm also switching to eval mode here.
I'm getting the text.
Yeah.
This is nothing new here.
And here I'm going to push the data through the model, push the tokens through the model on the GPU
and then print out the number of hidden layers.
So that's the number of transformer blocks plus one for the initial embeddings.
Uh matrix.
And then yeah, this variable is just for, uh, making it a little bit more convenient to run the for
loop later on.
Here you see the info about the model.
So it's just over 50,000 tokens, very similar to GPT two.
And now here in this model, there are 2560 embeddings dimensions.
So that's already more than three times as much as GPT two small.
And let's see I do like their naming convention here.
I find this to be a little bit more intuitive to understand what's going on.
So we have the post attention layer norm for example the input layer norm.
This is in the attention blocks or the transformer blocks.
Here is the attention.
They call this matrix query key value.
That's very informative.
And I also like their naming convention for the MLP layer that they say dense h.
The h is for hidden to for h.
So you can see right in the naming convention that we have A4X expansion.
And then from the four times the dimensionality back down to the h dimensionality, which is this over
here?
2560.
So we get up to 10,000 neurons in the middle of the MLP layers.
That's a lot.
Now for the analysis.
This four loop here shows the analyses that you should run in this exercise.
Obviously looping over all of the layers.
Now much of the code here is the same as in the previous video.
So you get all of the activations and mean center those get the singular values from the SVD, convert
to percent variance explained and calculate the cumulative variance explained.
And here you see I have two lines of code for the effective dimensionality component count in the previous
video.
I only calculated this for one threshold of 95%.
Here in this code challenge, you want to get two scores, one for 95% threshold and the other using
a 99% threshold.
That will allow you to visualize both sets of results and see if there are any qualitative differences
between the results when you use different thresholds.
And of course, you want to repeat all of this code for the shuffled tokens.
Very nice.
Now you can pause the video and get to work.
And now I will switch to code and show my solution compared to the previous video.
This variable here, this matrix effective dimensionality component count has an extra dimension in
it.
So in the previous video it was the number of layers by two where the two corresponded to the real tokens
versus the shuffled tokens.
And now I have an additional dimension in this matrix.
Actually, it's technically a tensor now.
And that corresponds to the two thresholds for 95% versus 99%.
Otherwise all of this code you have seen before in the previous video, and in fact this line of code
which is new, this is also like super duper easy.
Once you get this line, all you have to do is change the number over here for the new threshold.
Now for the visualizations.
Here you can make two sets of plots as I showed in the previous video, but I would like you to make
a couple of small changes.
So these two plots here show the cumulative percent variance explained for all of the layers, for the
real tokens and the shuffled tokens.
Now that part is exactly the same as in the previous video, but here I think it would be pretty informative
to have horizontal dashed lines through the plot showing the thresholds so that you see here on the
left.
So the dashed lines are at 95 and 99%.
And basically when you plot this through, it will help visualize what these thresholds mean for the
different layers.
And then in these two plots here, these show the scatter plots for the shuffled and the real tokens
over the different model layers on the x axis.
Now this part is the same as in the previous video.
Here I have two plots, one for the threshold of 95% variance, and here for the threshold of 99% variance.
But what is different here compared to the previous video, is that the y axis here now shows the percent
of maximum possible dimensionality.
In the previous video, the y axis was just the number of components.
But the thing is that the raw number is kind of difficult to interpret, because that number can vary
depending on the model size and on the data set size, like the token sequence length.
So the raw number of components for an effective dimensionality analysis is not necessarily so easy
to interpret, and certainly not easy to compare across different models or different data sets, different
batch sizes, and so on.
So therefore you have to figure out what is the theoretical maximum possible number of dimensions for
this analysis, and then scale the y axis here to show the percent of dimensionality that is occupied
by the effective dimensionality.
So to go back to the piece of paper analogy from the previous video.
If we say that the maximum possible dimensionality of a piece of paper is three because it's an object
in a three dimensional world, then the scaled proportion effective dimensionality would be two thirds
or 67%.
I hope you enjoy working through this exercise.
You can also qualitatively compare the results that you get here to the results that we got in the previous
video.
And that is interesting because it's the same analysis on the same text, but with different models.
Anyway, now I will switch to code because that's what I always do at this point.
The code to generate this first plot.
This is the line plots of cumulative variance explained.
It's exactly the same code as in the previous video.
The only thing that I added here is these lines of code to draw horizontal lines at 95 and 99% variance.
So there you go.
So now the interpretation is for each of these colored lines here.
Where do they cross the 95% threshold.
And that number you would read out as the number of components it takes to get to 95% total variability
in the data set explained.
Okay.
So this is for the real components and for the shuffled or sorry the real tokens and the shuffled tokens.
This code here is also basically the same as in the previous video code.
Only the only thing I changed is instead of plotting effective comp count, this variable that we calculated
in the for loop, I created a new variable uh with p at the end for percent of total, uh, possible
dimensionality.
That's what this should actually say.
Not total variance.
Total possible dimensionality.
Okay.
And how do we calculate that?
The key insight is to appreciate that the maximum possible dimensionality corresponds to the number
of singular values.
So we can simply divide by the length of s.
Remember s was the singular values vector that we calculated.
This was the output from the numpy SVD function.
So you just divide the number of components by the total number of singular values.
This would give you proportion.
And then I multiply by 100 just to give me a percentage.
So this is pretty interesting.
We see that there are some features of this plot that looks similar to what we saw in the previous video
with GPT, and some features that are a little bit different.
So one thing that is similar is that the the shuffled and the in.
The real tokens overlap in terms of their dimensionality.
Subspace in the beginning.
But as we get later in the model, the real tokens take off.
They expand in dimensionality, whereas the shuffle tokens stay low or get even a little bit lower.
And then when you compare the 95% to the 99% threshold, you see that they are not exactly the same
but qualitatively show quite similar patterns.
And that is generally something you will often see in these kinds of analyses.
And it's something you always want to find in an analysis that as you vary a parameter within some reasonable
range, the general pattern of results is going to stay roughly the same.
If the pattern of results is changing wildly and erratically just by tweaking some tiny little parameter,
then I mean, maybe if that parameter is like a control some nonlinear gain or something like that.
That could be explainable.
But in my humble opinion, if tweaking one parameter a tiny bit really has an enormous qualitative impact
on the results, then those are probably not very stable, reliable and reproducible results.
One of the take home messages from these exercises so far, and also from the previous video, is that
the qualitative pattern of the effective dimensionality seemed fairly consistent when comparing the
two different models, and also when using the two different thresholds.
But all of that is using the exact same 1000 tokens from one specific book.
So what I want you to do now in exercise four is explore some other texts.
You can try some text from the Heart of Darkness, which you can also download from gutenberg.org and
you can use the website.
Pigeons aren't real.
We use this website earlier in the course about tokenization of HTML.
So when you download this website, you're not just getting the text that you see here.
When you look at the rendered page.
Instead, you're going to get all of the HTML and the CSS code that is on this page.
Now The Heart of Darkness is a very different book.
It's written in a very different style from Through the Looking Glass, but they are both English texts.
And those two texts together are very different from HTML code.
So it will be pretty interesting to see how these differ in terms of the effective dimensionality analysis.
I have code to import these URLs, these text data sets in the solutions and helper files.
So I recommend just copying from that instead of going through the effort to find the URL from these
websites and so on.
Importantly, you do not want to change anything else in the code.
All you want to do is replace the line where you import the data, and then run the rest of the code
exactly the same without changing anything.
I also recommend saving some screenshots of the Alice results, so that it's easy to compare them to
these other two data sets.
Okay, so now you can pause the video and work through this exercise.
And now I will show and discuss my results.
This is the URL.
This would be the line of code to replace for using the Heart of Darkness.
I'm actually just going to copy this.
I will let you take care of this one on your own.
Okay so let's see.
Let's scroll up here Year and just in the interest of laziness, I'm even going to keep all.
Of these tokens here.
Like this.
Okay, so now you can see this is the HTML and CSS code and all of that stuff.
So same number of tokens.
But it comes from a very very different source.
And now here's what it looks like when it's shuffled.
It's just complete utter nonsense.
Okay.
So now I am going to just run all of the rest of the code here up through the visualization.
So these plots overall look quite steep relative to what we saw before with the Alice tokens.
And it looks like the layers are all a little bit more tightly bound together.
So there's a lot less differences across the different layers.
And then when we look down at the scatter plot here, we see something really interesting.
We do in general see a slight increase.
So a trend towards an increase in the dimensionality as we get deeper into the model.
So that was consistent with what we have seen before with other texts.
But here it looks like the shuffled tokens actually expand the dimensionality.
So the null hypothesis tokens are actually more high dimensional than the HTML and CSS and Java and
whatever other languages are inside that website.
So that is quite interesting and thought provoking.
This means that the encoding of those HTML tags actually doesn't require a lot of dimensionality.
You only need a relatively small amount of space inside the model to store all of the processing and
representations that are needed for the HTML code, for the website code, and at best, that gets up
to like 20% of the maximum dimensionality of the model processing.
And that is interesting to think about, because it basically means that 80% of the model is doing nothing,
or at least it is not really crucial for the generation of the tokens.
That is part of the reason why these compressed models can still do reasonably well on a lot of tasks.
It is not necessarily the case that the bigger the model, the better it is, and that is partly for
this reason.
There is a lot of like space in the model, in the data space that is not always used by the model.
And if you have a very narrow task like coding, then that's more so the case for a very complex task,
like generating some really complex set of texts.
Effective dimensionality is a really interesting and thought provoking analysis.
It's also quite versatile.
So here we applied it to just the Hidden States activations.
But of course, you could also run this analysis to any collection of data that you want.
For example, let's say just the query vectors from one particular attention head.
As with a lot of analyses and complex data, the sky is the limit.
So the challenging part is figuring out how to set up the analysis.
Why to run it that way and how to interpret the results.
Also, in my opinion, a dimensionality analysis like this is not the final analysis.
Instead, this would be the starting point to begin to dig deeper and try to understand what is actually
happening in those different dimensions, and why the dimensionalities are squeezing and expanding as
you go through the transformer, and what is happening in the low variability dimensions that get squeezed
out.